# No, we won’t have a video call for that!
Communications for distributed teams

* * *

FrOSCon 2020

* * *

[Florian Haas](https://twitter.com/xahteiwi) ![City Network logo](images/citynetwork-logo.svg) <!-- .element class="inline" --> [City Network](https://citynetworkhosting.com)

<!-- Note --> 
This presentation is a talk presented at [FrOSCon 2020
Cloud Edition](https://www.froscon.de/). It is [CC-BY-SA
4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) licensed, see
[the license](/LICENSE) for details.

Hello and welcome, dear FrOScon people — this is my talk on
communications in distributed teams. My name is Florian, this is the
second time I‘m speaking at FrOScon, and you probably want to know
what the hell qualifies me to talk about this specific issue. So:


### Why am I talking here?

Office dweller — 11 years <!-- .element: class="fragment" -->

Distributed company founder — 6 years <!-- .element: class="fragment" -->

Remote exec leading distributed team in mixed-mode company — 3 years <!-- .element: class="fragment" -->

<!-- Note -->
So, why am I talking about **that**?

Or rather more precisely, why am **I** talking about that?

I turned 40 last year, have been in IT for about 20 years now (19
full-time), and out of that I have worked

* in 4 successive companies, all of which worked out of offices,
  for 11 years, 

* in a completely distributed company, that I founded, for 6 years,

* and now, for about three years, I have been running a distributed
  team that is a business unit of a company that has existed for 15
  years and throughout that time, has only ever worked from a single
  office.

So I think I might have seen and become aware of some of the rather
interesting challenges that come with this.


### What changed since last time?

A lot. <!-- .element: class="fragment" -->

<!-- Note -->
I originally wrote and presented this talk for the first time in
December 2019. At the time, you probably had forgotten about SARS, had
no idea what SARS-CoV2 or COVID-19 were, and many of you were probably
working from offices.

And then something like three months later, everything changed and
suddenly, this talk became much more relevant to a much greater
audience.

And something else happened: a lot of people suddenly started talking
about working from home and distributed teams, and a lot of those
people who were talking very loudly, had themselves only been working
with or managing distributed teams since March. And a fair amount of
what you could about the subject then, and can still read now, is
complete and utter bullshit.

So there’s one point I actually *didn’t* make in the initial version
of this talk, because I thought it was self-evident. But I have come
to the conclusion that to a lot of people it is not, so to rectify
this omission from last December — and with apologies for that
omission to the wonderful DevOpsDays Tel Aviv crowd, who were my first
audience for this talk, let me make this one thing very clear from the
outset:


### What effective distributed work is not <!-- .element: class="hidden" -->

Effective distributed collaboration is **not** pretending to be in an
office while staring into a webcam all day.

<!-- Note -->
You will never be able to capitalize on work as a distributed team
unless you kick some office habits. The key to distributed teams being
effective is **not** that they happen to not be in the same place, as
you’ll see from the remainder of this talk. So to expect success from
the approach that you take the habits of an office, simply remove the
element of locality, replace every face to face meeting with a video
call and carry on, is ludicrous.

The good news is that if you do it right, you’ll end up with a far
better team than a local one would ever be, *and* everyone has a
chance at far better work-life balance, *and* you don’t waste awful
amounts of time and energy and fossil fuels on your commute.


### What’s in this talk?

Communication mode in distributed teams

The value of asynchronous collaboration

Why writing is so important

Doing without meetings (mostly)

<!-- Note -->
So you’ll find a few general themes throughout this talk:

* What modes we have *available* for communications in teams;

* Why distributed teams always collaborate *asynchronously,* and what
  communication modes lend themselves to that particularly well;
  
* Why *written communication* is so important in distributed teams;

* And why *meetings* (like video calls) are a mode of communication
  that effective distributed teams hardly ever need to use — except
  for very specific reasons.

But I do want to state one thing upfront:


### This is _not science._

<!-- Note -->
Nothing of what I am talking about is steeped in any scientific
rigour. I present anecdotes, not evidence. I might be mistaking
correlation for causation, or the other way round. It’s solely based
on my personal experience, and the experience of others I have talked
to, watched, or read. Everything I say here is subject to debate and
rebuttal, or you can simply have a different opinion.

But it’s definitely **not** science.

Now with all of that said, let me attempt to give a definition of a
distributed team, according to my understanding:
